Stats (#73)
virgili0/Virgilio: Topics/statistics-fundamentals.md

# Statistics Fundamentals

# What you will learn 

In this guide, you'll learn what is the fundamental statistical knowledge you need to have in order
to build insightful Data Science projects and build machine learning systems upon them.

You'll also learn that not so much is needed to start to apply yourself to real-world data problems!

## Prerequisites

> The previous Paradiso guides.

Reviewer: Possibly add the "math fundamentals" guide to this? Or maybe mention that both should be taken care of "at the same time"?

Reviewer 2: I would second that

Reviewer 2: Back-linking paradiso or any other terms to the README page will only help and clarify to the readers, it won't take away anything that already is present in the guide.

Author: agree. done

## Time to complete
10 minutes.

# Index
- [Motivation](#Motivation)
- [Courses](#Courses)
  - [Descriptive Statistics](#)
  - [Probability Theory](#Probability-Theory)
  - [Bayesian Statistics](#Bayesian-Statistics)
- [Ask Questions](#Ask-Questions)
- [Conclusions](#Conclusions)

Let's dive right in!
 
### Motivation
The field of statistics is the **science of learning from data**.

Statistics is a crucial process behind how we make discoveries in science, make decisions based on data, and make predictions. 

Statistical knowledge helps you use the proper methods to collect the data, employ the correct analyses, and effectively present the results. 

Every fancy term you read related to the field of Data Science, or the even more misunderstood Artificial Intelligence, _is nothing more than statistical models trained with some mathematical algorithms_.

> That's why **to learn the basics of statistics is fundamental** in order to tackle real-worlds Data Science problems and build powerful predictive models upon them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's why **learning the basics of statistics is fundamental** in order to tackle real-world Data Science problems and build powerful predictive models upon them.
```

The two fundamental subjects to know in order to develop successful Data Science projects are **descriptive statistics** and **theory of probability**.

> 

Reviewer 2: 👍

We'll explore an additional one, Bayesian Statistics, which is pretty powerful but not mandatory for a first pass of the statistics topics.

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you add hyperlinks where possible in the whole guide - for Math and Stats related terms like Bayesian Statistics, etc...

Play with [this interactive website](https://seeing-theory.brown.edu/) to taste the flavor of the topics that this guide will suggest to you.

It's awesome.

### Descriptive Statistics

[Descriptive statistics](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/descriptive_statistics.asp) aim to analyze and summarise the data collected in an experiment. 

The set of methods and techniques used in descriptive statistics makes it possible to express the information contained in a set of data by means of graphs and particular numerical indicators.

> Moreover, with the techniques of investigation of descriptive statistics, it is possible to verify the adaptation of the experimental data to an assigned theoretical model, as well as to carry out comparative analyses between data sets.

Reviewer 2: data sets ==> datasets
Isnt it so?

Author: yep

---

To understand the concepts of descriptive statistics, the book Virgilio recommends is the following:

[**Statistics in Plain English**](http://www.pindex.com/uploads/post_docs/statistics%20in%20plain%20english%20(3rd,%202010)(PINDEX-DOC-6952).pdf) - [Timothy C. Urdan](https://www.amazon.com/Timothy-C.-Urdan/e/B001JP8H9Q%3Fref=dbs_a_mng_rwt_scns_share)

This book is fantastic because it focuses more on **the reason behind the concepts** concepts rather than on formulas or calculations, which are easily found elsewhere. 

**The book is mandatory for a full understanding of descriptive statistics** (it is certainly not the only book of statistics out there, but it is the best in terms of clarity of explanation and completeness of the basic concepts.).

Once finished, you can choose whether to go deeper with a more technical manual, like the following _free book_:

[**Elements of Statistics**](https://www.open.edu/openlearncreate/mod/oucontent/view.php?id=18263&printable=1)

This book deals in more depth with the various topics, but to start doing small experiments in Data Science is not necessary to address it immediately. 

> 

Reviewer 2: I could suggest a link which has maths and stats links - and I recommend giving it a thought on how you could add these link(s) to both the guides without making it look bulky.

Link: https://github.com/neomatrix369/awesome-ai-ml-dl/blob/master/details/maths-stats-probability.md

**Keep it as a reference!**

#### Check your knowledge

Test your knowledge with some of [these exercises](https://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/pglasserman/B6014/exercises.pdf).

Anyway, you can find a ton of them online, and remember, that the more you practice, the better you will get!

> 

Reviewer: Probably nice to mention, just for the sake of completeness, is the book ["How to lie with Statistics"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/How_to_Lie_with_Statistics) that shows how important it is that the general public be educated when it comes to statistics. Moreover if you plan to fiddle around with data and plots and whatnot!

Author: Totally true! I 've forgotten it. thanks

### Probability Theory

Probability theory governs every daily event, from microscopic to macroscopic, even if we hardly realize it!

But you may have thought about the odds of winning, for example, the game of dice, or when you estimate the probability of having successfully passed an exam!

Probability theory is so interconnected with statistical and mathematical concepts that it _is difficult to explain why it is fundamental_: simply consider it as the basic building blocks of more advanced statistical concepts based on it.

Not to mention that knowledge of probability theory can be very useful in everyday life since it can suggest to us how to behave on certain occasions, to make the best choices, or involving the least risk of failure.

> Fortunately, you can have the (perhaps) best course on probability theory available to date, offered as usual by MIT. 

Reviewer 2: Hyperlink to MIT, maybe also links to the courses you are hinting in the paragraph.

Author: ok

It's good to have a first-class education from home for free, huh? 

What an incredible time to be alive!

Take the course at:

[**Introduction to Probability - Video Lectures**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1uW3qMFA9Ho&list=PLUl4u3cNGP60hI9ATjSFgLZpbNJ7myAg6)

In addition, keep this _free complete book_ as a reference:

[**Introduction to Probability - Book**](https://www.dartmouth.edu/~chance/teaching_aids/books_articles/probability_book/amsbook.mac.pdf)

> 

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/neomatrix369/awesome-ai-ml-dl/blob/master/details/maths-stats-probability.md#probability-and-probabilistic-programming --- if you like to add this in some creative way

#### Check your knowledge

Test your knowledge with some of [these exercises](https://www.math.kth.se/matstat/gru/sf1901/TCOMK/exercises.pdf).

Anyway, you can find a ton of them online, and remember, that the more you practice, the better you will get!

### Bayesian Statistics

This last topic is not fundamental for a first pass study, but it's highly recommended since some of Machine Learning algorithms are based on it or leverage some concepts from Bayesian Theory.

The Bayesian approach is often distinguished from the "classical" approach, which you have studied in the [Descriptive Statistics](#Descriptive-Statistics) section, and which is called "frequentist" when compared to the "Bayesian" approach.

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a resource that explains the difference between the "frequentist" when compared to the "Bayesian" approach? I find such things help clarify and also create memory about both the topics what they are and how they differ?

Author: Yes totally agree. Thanks

> The Bayesian approach to statistics is based upon the famous [Bayes Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayes%27_theorem), which states that the probability of an event when prior evidence is given and that might be related to that event.

Reviewer: I don't fully understand the end of the sentence, starting at "which states that the probability [...]".

Reviewer 2: Same here, can you please explain this sentence again.

Author: Sorry I was crazy with that sentence :D re-written and put an example (from wikipedia)

> For example, if cancer is related to age, then, using Bayes’ theorem, a person’s age can be used to more precisely or accurately assess the probability that they have cancer, in contrast to the assessment of the probability of cancer made without knowledge of the person's age.

Reviewer 2: I have a nice article to share about this, and maybe it can be added here: https://lavanya.ai/2019/05/16/bayes-theorem/ also this [kaggle kernel](
    - https://www.kaggle.com/chandan3231/naive-bayes-probabilistic-ml-titanic-survival
    - ) explain the concept with a simple example and diagram.

Author: thanks the second is a very good link. I put it

You can take this course to understand the Bayesian approach to statistics, along with many more concepts, taking the following course:

[**Statistical Rethinking - Video Lectures**](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLDcUM9US4XdM9_N6XUUFrhghGJ4K25bFc)

You find the complete book from the same author at:

[**Statistical Rethinking - Book**](https://www.amazon.com/Statistical-Rethinking-Bayesian-Examples-Chapman/dp/1482253445)

> 

Reviewer 2: Same link here https://github.com/neomatrix369/awesome-ai-ml-dl/blob/master/details/maths-stats-probability.md#probability-and-probabilistic-programming (contains Bayesian stuff)

### Ask Questions
A rule of thumb rule to learn fast and effectively is to ask questions and read other's questions and answers.

Join communities of people interested in the topic (e.g. Reddit): here you can find discussions, search by keywords (e.g. "standard deviation"), and ask questions, with experts who will answer and help you.

Some _tips_ regarding questions:

- Try to form specific, well-written questions, to minimize the time used by the respondent.
- Do not ask a question whose answer is found with a quick search on google.
- If the questions are too general or show laziness they'll likely remain unanswered...

Some subreddits you can subscribe to are:

- [r/Statistics](https://www.reddit.com/r/statistics/)
- [r/AskStatistics](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskStatistics/)
- [r/ProbabilityTheory](https://www.reddit.com/r/probabilitytheory/)
- [r/Bayes](https://www.reddit.com/r/Bayes/)

Two other good places to post (well structured) questions are:

- [HackerNews](http://hn.premii.com/)

> - [Quora](https://www.quora.com/)

Reviewer: Once more, consider adding [math.stackexchange.com](https://math.stackexchange.com).

Author: True

### Conclusions

That's all! 

With the above-suggested courses, you should be equipped with most of the statistics knowledge you need to start working on simple Data Science projects. 

The next guide will focus on learning the **Python programming language**, the real tool that will allow you to put into practice the knowledge you've gained with your hard study.

----

> Written by [_clone95_](https://github.com/clone95)

Reviewer 2: Another good guide ❤️ please keep them coming!

Author: <3 Thanks to your reviews, they are becoming even better :D
